---
layout: post
title: 2 · Lose Yourself to Scripting
category: note
date: 2023-11-14
tags: master-students
description:
---

## Basics of Bash Scripting
- Execution of commands and control flow expressions
- Variables, control flow, and unique syntax
- Tailored for shell-related tasks

---

## Variables and Strings in Bash
- Assign with `foo=bar`
- Access values with `$foo`
- Differentiating `'` and `"` for strings

---

```bash
foo=bar
echo "$foo"  # prints bar
echo '$foo'  # prints $foo
```

---

## Special Variables in Bash
- `$0` - Name of the script
- `$1` to `$9` - Arguments to the script. `$1` is the first argument and so on.
- `$@` - All the arguments
- `$#` - Number of arguments
- `$?` - Return code of the previous command
- `$$` - Process identification number (PID) for the current script
- `!!` - Entire last command, including arguments. A common pattern is to execute a command only for it to fail due to missing permissions; you can quickly re-execute the command with sudo by doing `sudo !!`
- `$_` - Last argument from the last command. If you are in an interactive shell, you can also quickly get this value by typing `Esc` followed by `.` or `Alt+.`
- Comprehensive list: [Special Chars in Bash](https://tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/special-chars.html)

---

## Command Execution and Return Codes
- Conditional execution with `&&`, `||`, `;`
- Understanding `true` and `false` commands

```bash
false || echo "Oops, fail"
# Oops, fail
true || echo "Will not be printed"
#
true && echo "Things went well"
# Things went well
false && echo "Will not be printed"
#
true ; echo "This will always run"
# This will always run
false ; echo "This will always run"
# This will always run
```

---

## Permissions – brief recap

Unix-like permissions are:

1. **Read (r)**: Open and read a file. List contents for directories.
1. **Write (w)**: Modify a file's contents. Add, remove, rename files in directories.
1. **Execute (x)**: Execute a file as a program/script. Access or traverse directories.

Grouped by 3 user categories:

- **User (u)**: The owner of the file.
- **Group (g)**: Users in the file's group.
- **Other (o)**: Users not the owner or in the file's group.

---

## Default permissions

When a file is created in Unix, default permissions are usually:

- Read and Write for the User (rw-)
- Read for the Group (r--)
- Read for Others (r--)

Depicted as: `rw-r--r--`

---

## Script Example

- Prefer `[[ ]]` for comparisons

```bash
#!/bin/bash

echo "Starting program at $(date)" # Date will be substituted

echo "Running program $0 with $# arguments with pid $$"

for file in "$@"; do
    grep foobar "$file" > /dev/null 2> /dev/null
    # When pattern is not found, grep has exit status 1
    # We redirect STDOUT and STDERR to a null register since we do not care about them
    if [[ $? -ne 0 ]]; then
        echo "File $file does not have any foobar, adding one"
        echo "# foobar" >> "$file"
    fi
done
```

---

Command substitution using `$( CMD )`

```docker
    GNUPGHOME="$(mktemp -d)" && \
    export GNUPGHOME && \
    for key in \
        "B46DC71E03FEEB7F89D1F2491F7A8F87B9D8F501" \
      ; do \
        gpg --batch --keyserver "keyserver.ubuntu.com" --recv-keys "$key" ; \
    done && \
    gpg --verify "/tmp/$QD_NAME.tar.gz.sha256.asc" "/tmp/$QD_NAME.tar.gz.sha256" && \
    (cd /tmp && sha256sum --check --status "$QD_NAME.tar.gz.sha256") && \
```

---

## Control Flow and Functions
- Supports `if`, `case`, `while`, `for`
- Function example: Creating and entering a directory

```bash
mcd () {
    mkdir -p "$1"
    cd "$1"
}
```

---

## Shell Functions vs Scripts

- Functions are in the shell's language; scripts can be in any language.
- Functions load once; scripts load each execution.
- Functions can modify the environment; scripts cannot, but receive exported variables.
- Functions promote code modularity, reuse, and clarity, and are often included in scripts.

---

## Bash Comparisons and Globbing
- Globbing with wildcards `?`, `*`, and `{}`

---

# Shell Tools

---

## Discovering Command Usage
- Using `--help`, `man` command, and TLDR pages
- Example: `man rm`, `tldr tar`

---

## Finding Files
- Tools: `find`, `fd`, `locate`
- Usage scenarios for each

---

## Finding Code
- `grep` and alternatives like `ack`, `ag`, `rg`
- Pattern searching examples

---

## Finding Shell Commands
- Utilizing `history`, `Ctrl+R`, `fzf` bindings
- Autosuggestions and protecting sensitive history entries

---

## Directory Navigation
- Fast navigation with `fasd`, `autojump`
- Advanced tools: `tree`, `broot`, `nnn`, `ranger`
